Английские сказки для девочек / English Fairy Tales for Girls
Д. Л. Абрагин

Елена Валерьевна Лаптева

Сергей Александрович Матвеев


Легко читаем по-английски
В книге вас ждут замечательные сказки на английском языке, которые будут интересны всем: «Красавица и чудовище», «Золушка», «Спящая красавица», «Рапунцель» и другие. Адаптированные тексты сопровождаются комментариями к словам и выражениям, вызывающим затруднения. После каждой сказки следуют упражнения для проверки понимания прочитанного. В конце книги расположен словарь, содержащий лексику из текстов. Издание предназначено для тех, кто только начинает изучать английский язык (уровень 1 – Elementary).





Английские сказки для девочек / English Fairy Tales for Girls








© Абрагин Д. Л., адаптация текста, комментарии, упражнения

© Матвеев С. А., адаптация текста, комментарии, упражнения

© Лаптева Е. В., адаптация текста, комментарии, упражнения

© Кульбицкая И. В., иллюстрации © Салтыков М. М., иллюстрации

© ООО «Издательство АСТ», 2017





Красавица и чудовище / Beauty and the Beast

(After Charles Perrault)








1



There was once a very rich merchant, who had six children, three sons, and three daughters. His daughters were extremely beautiful, especially the youngest. When she was little, everybody admired her and called her “the Little Beauty”; so that, as she grew up, she still went by the name of Beauty,[1 - she still went by the name of Beauty – её все так же называли «Красавица»] which made her sisters very jealous.

The youngest, as she was the most beautiful, was also better than her sisters. The two eldest had a great deal of pride, because they were rich. They went out every day to parties, balls, plays, concerts, and so forth, and they laughed at their youngest sister, because she spent the greatest part of her time in reading good books.

As it was known that they were great fortunes,[2 - they were great fortunes – они были богатыми] several eminent merchants proposed to them, but the two eldest said they would never marry unless they could meet with a duke, or an earl at least. Beauty very civilly thanked them that courted her and told them she was too young yet to marry, but chose to stay with her father a few years longer.

All at once[3 - All at once – Неожиданно] the merchant lost his whole fortune, excepting a small country house at a great distance from town, and told his children with tears in his eyes they had to go there and work for their living. The two eldest answered that they would not leave the town for they had several lovers, who they were sure would be glad to have them, though they had no fortune;[4 - for they had lovers, who they were sure would be glad to have them, though they had no fortune – поскольку у них есть возлюбленные, которые не оставят их, несмотря на их бедность] but the good ladies were mistaken, for their lovers slighted and forsook them in their poverty. As they were not beloved because of their pride, everybody said, “They do not deserve to be pitied.” “But”, added they, “we are extremely concerned for Beauty; she was such a charming, sweet-tempered creature, spoke so kindly to poor people, and was of such an affable, obliging behaviour.” Nay, several gentlemen were ready to marry her, though they knew she had not a penny, but she told them she could not think of leaving her poor father in his misfortunes and was determined to go along with him into the country to comfort and attend him. Poor Beauty at first was sadly grieved at the loss of her fortune.[5 - was sadly grieved at the loss of her fortune – сильно горевала о потере благосостояния] “But,” said she to herself, “I must try to make myself happy without a fortune.”




Упражнения


1. Переведите на русский язык:

merchant, to admire, jealous, pride, fortune, eminent, to propose, to marry, duke, earl, civilly, to court, excepting, poverty, to deserve, extremely, misfortune.



2. Ответьте на вопросы:

1. How many children did the merchant have?

2. Were the merchant’s daughters beautiful?

3. What was the youngest daughter called?

4. Where did the eldest sisters go out everyday?

5. How did the youngest sister spend the greatest part of her time?

6. Who proposed to the sisters?

7. What happened to the merchant all at once?

8. What did people say about Beauty and her sisters?

9. Did anybody want to marry Beauty?

10. What did Beauty decide?



3. Какие утверждения верны?

1. The merchant had seven children.

2. The youngest daughter was the ugliest.

3. The two eldest daughters had a great deal of pride because they were rich.

4. One day Beauty decided to marry an eminent merchant.

5. All at once the merchant lost his whole fortune.

6. The eldest sisters were not beloved because of their pride.

7. Nobody was concerned for Beauty.

8. Several gentlemen were ready to marry Beauty, though they knew she had not a penny.



4. Вставьте правильные предлоги (at, to).

1. They went out __________ parties, balls, plays, concerts, and so forth every day.

2. They laughed __________ their youngest sister, because she spent the greatest part of her time reading good books.

3. The merchant lost his whole fortune, excepting a small country house __________ a great distance from town.

4. Beauty spoke kindly __________ poor people.




2



When they came to their country house, the merchant and his three sons applied themselves to husbandry and tillage,[6 - applied themselves to husbandry and tillage – занялись ведением хозяйства и вспахиванием земли] and Beauty rose at four in the morning and made haste to clean the house and cook dinner for the family. In the beginning she found it very difficult, for she had not been used to work as a servant, but in less than two months she grew stronger and healthier than ever. After she had done her work, she read, played the piano, or sung while she spun.

On the contrary, her two sisters did not know how to spend their time; they got up at ten and did nothing but wander about the whole day, lamenting the loss of their fine clothes and acquaintance. “Look at our youngest sister,” said they, one to the other, “what a poor, stupid, mean-spirited creature she is, to be contented with such an unhappy situation.”

The good merchant was of quite a different opinion; he knew very well that Beauty was better than her sisters, in her person as well as her mind, and admired her humility, industry and patience, for her sisters not only left her all the work of the house to do but insulted her every moment.

The family had lived about a year in this retirement when the merchant received a letter with an account that the vessel on board of which he had some goods safely arrived. This news made the two eldest daughters happy and they immediately flattered themselves with the hopes of returning to town,[7 - flattered themselves with the hopes of returning to town – стали тешить себя надеждой о возвращении в город] for they were quite weary of a country life, and when they saw their father ready to set out, they begged him to buy them new dresses, ribbons, and other trifles; but Beauty asked for nothing for she thought that all the money her father was going to receive would not be sufficient to purchase everything her sisters wanted.

“What will you have, Beauty?” said her father.

“Since you have the goodness to think of me,[8 - Since you have the goodness to think of me – Раз уж ты так великодушен, что думаешь обо мне]” answered she, “be so kind to bring me a rose, for as none grows hereabouts, they are a kind of rarity.”

The merchant went on his journey, but when he came there, they went to law with him about the merchandise,[9 - they went to law with him about the merchandise – начались судебные разбирательства о его товарах]and after a great deal of trouble and pains to no purpose,[10 - and after a great deal of trouble and pains to no purpose – после большого количества бессмысленных хлопот и беспокойств] he came back as poor as before.

He was not far from his own house, thinking on the pleasure he should have in seeing his children again, when going through a large forest he lost himself.[11 - he lost himself – он сбился с пути] It rained and snowed terribly, and the wind was so high that it threw him twice off his horse,[12 - that it threw him twice off his horse – что он дважды падал с лошади] and he heard wolves’ howling all round him. Suddenly he saw a light at some distance. It came from a palace illuminated from top to bottom. The merchant thanked God for this happy discovery and hastened to the place, but he was greatly surprised at not meeting with anyone in the outer courts. His horse followed him and, seeing a large stable open, went in and, finding both hay and oats, the poor beast, who was almost famished, started to eat greedily. The merchant tied him up to the manger and walked towards the house, where he saw no one. Entering into a large hall, he found a good fire and a table plentifully set out with but one cover laid.[13 - plentifully set out with but one cover laid – с большим количеством блюд, но всего лишь на одну персону] As he was wet quite through with the rain and snow, he drew near the fire[14 - he drew near the fire – он устроился у огня] to dry himself. “I hope,” said he, “the master of the house or his servants will excuse the liberty I take; I suppose it will not be long before some of them appear.”
















Упражнения


1. Переведите на русский язык:

husbandry, tillage, to lament, contented, industry, patience, to insult, vessel, weary, trifles, to purchase, rarity, journey, merchandise, howling, top, bottom, discovery, stable, hay, greedily, to dry oneself, liberty.



2. Ответьте на вопросы:

1. What did Beauty do in the morning?

2. How did Beauty’s sisters spend their time?

3. What did they say about Beauty?

4. What did the merchant think about Beauty?

5. What letter did the merchant receive one day?

6. What did Beauty’s sisters beg the merchant to buy?

7. Why did Beauty ask her father to bring her a rose?

8. What happened to the merchant on his way back home?

9. What did the merchant find entering a large hall?

10. What did the merchant think about the master and his servants?



3. Какие утверждения верны?

1. Beauty rose at four in the morning and made haste to clean the house and cook dinner for the family.

2. After she had done her work, she played the guitar or met with her friends.

3. Beauty’s sisters usually helped her to cook dinner.

4. The merchant knew very well that Beauty was better than her sisters.

5. One day the merchant received a letter with an account that the vessel on board of which he had some goods safely arrived.

6. Beauty asked the merchant to bring her some jewelry.

7. Going through a large forest, the merchant found a beautiful castle and entered it.

8. Entering a large hall, the merchant saw the master of the house.



4. Вставьте правильные предлоги (for, from, with, to).

1. When they came ________ their country house, the merchant and his three sons applied themselves to husbandry and tillage.

2. Beauty rose at four in the morning and made haste to clean the house and cook dinner ________ the family.

3. The merchant received a letter ________ an account that the vessel on board of which he had some goods safely arrived.

4. It came ________ a palace illuminated from top to bottom.




3



He waited a considerable time until it struck eleven, and still nobody came. At last he was so hungry that he could stay no longer but took a chicken and ate it in two mouthfuls. After this, he drank a few glasses of wine and, growing more courageous, he went out of the hall and crossed through several grand apartments with magnificent furniture until he came into a chamber, which had an exceeding good bed in it, and as he was very much fatigued and it was past midnight, he decided it was best to shut the door and go to bed.

It was ten the next morning before the merchant woke, and as he was going to rise, he was astonished to see a good suit of clothes in the room of his own; “Certainly,” said he, “this palace belongs to some kind fairy, who has seen and pitied my distress.” He looked through a window, but instead of snow saw the most delightful arbours and beautiful flowers. He then returned to the great hall, where he had taken supper the night before, and found some chocolate on a little table. “Thank you, good Madam Fairy,” said he aloud, “for being so careful, as to provide me a breakfast; I am extremely obliged to you for all your favours.[15 - obliged to you for all your favours – признателен вам за вашу благосклонность]”

The good man ate the chocolate and then went to look for his horse, but passing through an arbour of roses, he remembered Beauty’s request to him and gathered a branch with several flowers; immediately he heard a great noise and saw such a frightful Beast coming towards him that he was ready to faint away.

“You are very ungrateful,” said the Beast to him in a terrible voice; “I have saved your life by receiving you into my castle, and, in return, you steal my roses, which I value beyond any thing in the universe. You shall die for it; I give you just a quarter of an hour to prepare yourself and say your prayers




Конец ознакомительного фрагмента.


Текст предоставлен ООО «ЛитРес».

Прочитайте эту книгу целиком, купив полную легальную версию (https://www.litres.ru/s-a-matveev/angliyskie-skazki-dlya-devochek-english-fairy-tales-for-girls/?lfrom=30440123) на ЛитРес.

Безопасно оплатить книгу можно банковской картой Visa, MasterCard, Maestro, со счета мобильного телефона, с платежного терминала, в салоне МТС или Связной, через PayPal, WebMoney, Яндекс.Деньги, QIWI Кошелек, бонусными картами или другим удобным Вам способом.



notes


Примечания





1


she still went by the name of Beauty – её все так же называли «Красавица»




2


they were great fortunes – они были богатыми




3


All at once – Неожиданно




4


for they had lovers, who they were sure would be glad to have them, though they had no fortune – поскольку у них есть возлюбленные, которые не оставят их, несмотря на их бедность




5


was sadly grieved at the loss of her fortune – сильно горевала о потере благосостояния




6


applied themselves to husbandry and tillage – занялись ведением хозяйства и вспахиванием земли




7


flattered themselves with the hopes of returning to town – стали тешить себя надеждой о возвращении в город




8


Since you have the goodness to think of me – Раз уж ты так великодушен, что думаешь обо мне




9


they went to law with him about the merchandise – начались судебные разбирательства о его товарах




10


and after a great deal of trouble and pains to no purpose – после большого количества бессмысленных хлопот и беспокойств




11


he lost himself – он сбился с пути




12


that it threw him twice off his horse – что он дважды падал с лошади




13


plentifully set out with but one cover laid – с большим количеством блюд, но всего лишь на одну персону




14


he drew near the fire – он устроился у огня




15


obliged to you for all your favours – признателен вам за вашу благосклонность


